---
layout: slides
title: "D4.1: Python/Cython bindings for PARI and its integration in Sage"
theme: white
transition: none
author: Luca De Feo
---

<section data-markdown data-separator="^---\n" data-separator-vertical="^--\n" data-separator-notes="^Note:">
# {{ page.title }}

{{ page.author }}

<https://github.com/OpenDreamKit/OpenDreamKit/issues/83>

---

# A matter of language

## C

- Low level language.
- Fast, portable.
- Slow development.

--

## Python

- High level language.
- Good for fast prototyping, even more portable.
- Slower performance.
- Popular among the scientific community.

**Best of both worlds:** write in Python, call fast C libraries.

---

# A matter of systems

## PARI/GP

- One of the oldest Mathematics software (1983): algebra, number theory.
- Well known and used in the computational number theory community
  (e.g., LMFDB, see WP6).
- Written in C.

--

## SageMath

- General purpose Mathematics software.
- Python interface (API) to many software and libraries (including
  PARI/GP).
- Additional functionality written in Python: e.g. cryptography,
  combinatorics.

--

## SnapPy

- Three dimensional hyperbolic geometry.
- Uses PARI/GP.
- Written in Python (Marc Culler and Nathan Dunfield).

Note:
```
M = Manifold('9_42')   # getting one manifold from the database
M.browse()             # open a widget with all info
```

---

## The CyPari fork

- In 2012 Marc Culler *forks* the SageMath interface to PARI/GP:
  
  - Makes SnapPy independent of SageMath.
  - Allows SnapPy to run seamlessly on Windows.
  - The project is called CyPari.
  
- While CyPari freezes and lags behind, the SageMath interface gets
  continuous improvements:
  
  - Updates to the PARI/GP library.
  - Automatized interface generation (J. Demeyer).

--

## Our goal

Work on a **clearly identified** piece of software, **useful to two
communities**, is dispersed among different projects.

Objectives:

- Extract the SageMath PARI/GP interface as an independent package.
- Build SnapPy on top of it.
- Maintain it inside the community, make it available to more
  projects.

---

## Status

Work split in 3 phases (33% done):

- Extract Sage signalling API (package cysignals, done)
  - Already used in other projects: <https://github.com/malb/fpylll>
- Decouple SageMath's PARI/GP interface from the *coercion model*.
- Clean up the interface API, by removing unneeded object orientation
  and external dependencies.

Easy last step: move SageMath's PARI/GP interface to a separate Python
package, depending on cysignals.

--

## Problems encountered

- SageMath interface more entangled with internals than initially
  thought.
  - Only recently we found a suitable design.
- Windows compatibility harder than initially thought for cysignals.

We estimate the remaining work to three person/weeks. We will be able
to deliver by M12.

---

## Lessons learned, perspectives

- General consensus on moving interfaces out of SageMath's codebase:
  - Benefits the community.
  - Makes design clearer.
  - Makes it easier to package for distributions (see WP3).

- Cysignals can be reused to externalize many other SageMath
  interfaces.

- This case study (arguably one of the hardest) will show how
  sustainable it is to extract and maintain these interfaces.

- Work to be continued in deliverable 4.2.

</section>
