---
layout: page
title: "Progress report for University of Warwick"
theme: white
transition: none
author: John Cremona
period: Reporting period from March 2017 to January 2018
---

# {{ page.title }}

{{ page.author }}

{{ page.period }}

---

## Finance and administration

The Warwick team's financial position is tracked by administrative
staff at the Warwick Mathematics Institute, who also maintain
time-sheets for the ODK-funded staff at Warwick.  The team's current
financial position is on track.

---
## Hiring

Chris Brady was hired as a Research Software Engineer from April 2017.
Thanks to joint funding from Warwick's Research Technology Platform in
Scientific Computing, Chris's post is permanent, and he is also
leading a new team of RSEs at Warwick in addition to ODK work.  In
June, Chris was joined by Heather Ratcliffe, also with joint funding,
and since then Chris and Heather have each been devoting 35% of their
time to ODK work.  Both are working on the LMFDB side of WP6, under
the direction of John Cremona, and since September 2017 are also
collaborating with Warwick LMFDB postdoc David Lowry-Duda, who is not
ODK-funded.

---
## Achievements

In order to familiarise himself with the LMFDB codebase, concepts and
development model Chris Brady first developed a simple (but still
useful) interface between the LMFDB's Number Fields Collection and
Sage.  Since June 2017, he and Heather Ratcliffe have developed a live
inventory system for the LMFDB, which is now part of the database
itself (so the LMFDB database is now, in a sense, self-documenting).
A prototype was presented at an LMFDB workshop in Warwick in June 2017
to receive early feedback from LMFDB developers.  In December 2017,
after much testing a fine-tuning by a small set of developers, the
first release was made (accessible from beta.lmfdb.org/inventory)
which can be used by all LMFDB developers.  As well as being a
necessary base on which to build a new API for the LMFDB, by
documenting precisely what objects and types are stored in the
database, the existence of this inventory has already revealed some
inconsistencies in certain LMFDB collections which are now able to be
addressed.

--
## Work in progress

Since January 2018 work has started on designing a second-generation
API for the LMFDB, in collaboration with the Erlangen group for a
Math-in-the-Middle interface as well as Sage developers for the Sage
interface.  The first collections to be treated will be Elliptic
Curves over Q and Number Fields which have the advantage of there
already existing well-developed Sage classes for such objects,
something which is not the case for many of objects stored in the
LMFDB collections.  Since early 2018 there have been regular online
meetings (via conference calls) between the Warwick and Erlangen
groups at which the Warwick team has learned more about the MitM
interface and reciprocally, the MitM developers have learned more
about the requirements for an interface with the LMFDB.  This has
resulted in a draft document concerning Types and codecs, a detailed
mathematical Use Case, as well as some other less detailed possible
future use cases.

---
## Workshops and dissemination activities

The June 2017 LMFDB workshop was an opportunity to introduce Chris and
Heather to a wider group of LMFDB developers.  Their ODK-funded work
on the inventory is already in daily use by LMFDB developers.

--
## Other

A new Simons Collaboration on Arithmetic Geometry, Number Theory, and
Computation (https://icerm.brown.edu/simonscollaboration/) started in
the northeast US in July 2017, with LMFDB development as one of its
aims.  John Cremona is an Affiliated Scientist with this
collaboration, and he will represent ODK at its first biannual
conference on algorithmic number theory at MIT in August 2018.

