---
layout: post
author: PS,UV,LL
title: Sage Days 77: packaging, portability, documentation tools Cernay (France) 2016-04-04 to 2016-04-04
tag: workshop
class: event
url: https://wiki.sagemath.org/days77
---

  ## Main goals

 This developer meeting was focused on
  initiating long term work on OpenDreamKit tasks related to packaging,
  portability and documentation tools for SageMath.

  ## OpenDreamKit implication

 This event was organized and funded by
  OpenDreamKit (Paris Sud).

  ## Event summary

 An intensive week with some short informal
  presentations, and many brainstorms and coding sprints.

  ## Demographic

 9 OpenDreamKit participants from three sites together
  with half a dozen other Sage, Sphinx, Guix, Gentoo, and Debian
  experts.

  ## Results and impact

 Proper packaging and distribution has
  been a recurrent issue for SageMath, and is a major task for OpenDreamKit
  (\longtaskref{component-architecture}{mod-packaging}). Major brainstorms occurred during
  the week to clarify the needs, isolate the core difficulties, and
  explore potential approaches to tackle them. The outcome was posted
  on the [Sage Wiki](https://wiki.sagemath.org/days77/packaging),
  to be shared and further edited by the community. This fostered
  tighter collaboration between the packaging efforts for various
  Linux distribution, and triggered major progress on the Debian
  packaging side.

  Similar brainstorms and coding sprints occurred around tasks
  \longtaskref{component-architecture}{portability},
  \longtaskref{UI}{sage-sphinx}, \longtaskref{UI}{structdocs}

  Altogether
 [20 Sage tickets](https://trac.sagemath.org/query?keywords=~days77&col=id&col=summary&col=status&col=type&col=priority&col=milestone&col=component&order=priority) were actively worked on during the week.
  
  
  
  

