---
layout: post
author: PS,UB,UV,UW
title: Atelier PARI/GP 2017b Clermont-Ferrand (FR), 2017-06-19 to 2017-06-23
tag: workshop
class: event
url: http://pari.math.u-bordeaux.fr/Events/PARI2017b/
---


## OpenDreamKit implication




OpenDreamKit participants: B. Allombert, K. Belabas, J.-P. Flori

OpenDreamKit provided the main funding source for the workshop (accommodation,
subsistence and travel expenses), for about 12k Euro. The following
institutions co-funded the event through Clermont institute of mathematics
  (Laboratoire
  Blaise Pascal): GDR Structuration de la Théorie des Nombres (CNRS), Région
  Auvergne Rhône-Alpes, Conseil départemental Puy-de-Dôme, Université
  Auvergne-Rhônes-Alpes and the city of Clermont-Ferrand.

## Event summary




The 8th Atelier PARI/GP took place in Clermont-Ferrand (France) from june
19th to 23rd with a special focus on Elliptic curves, Modular Forms and
$L$-Functions.

There were 36 registered participants from 16 different institutions
(no registration fees).

A typical day of the workshop had introductory talks and tutorials
in the morning; afternoons allowed ample time for hacking sessions,
discussions and training.

The Atelier featured 13 morning talks.

## Results and impact




This was a dissemination event with a special focus on recently developped
packages (Elliptic curves over number fields, Modular forms), before they were
merged into a formal release. We got lots of feedback on the interface and
documentation and a number of bugs and glitches were fixed as a result.

