---
layout: post
author: Marcin Kostur
title: 3d interactive data visualisation with K3D-jupyter
image: k3d/k3d_logo.png
tags:
  - blogpost
  - front-page
  - blogpost-technical
  - jupyter
  - teaching
  - emerging-technologies
---


**K3D-jupyter** is a Jupyter notebook 3d visualization package created
within ODK project.

The primary aim of K3D is to be an easy tool for 3d visualization. We
designed it with native interoperation with existing powerful
libraries such as VTK however, it is not strictly depending on
them. K3D plots are ipywidgets, thus it assures a perfect interaction of
a browser side widget with Python kernel by a proven and standardized
protocol.

Let us start with a simple example. The following Python code will
make a surface plot of a function of two variables:


```python
import k3d
import numpy as np

Nx, Ny  = 34, 33
xmin, xmax = -3, 4
ymin, ymax = -0, 3

x = np.linspace(xmin, xmax, Nx)
y = np.linspace(ymin, ymax, Ny)
x, y = np.meshgrid(x, y)
f = np.sin(x**2 + y**2)

plot = k3d.plot()
plt_surface = k3d.surface(f.astype(np.float32), bounds=[xmin,xmax,ymin,ymax])
plot += plt_surface
plot.display()
```

<iframe src="/public/images/k3d/surface.html" height="550" width="100%">></iframe>


The `plot` variable will be bound to an instance of the plot
widget. It contains a single plot object - `plt_surface`. In the
package there are many such objects available, covering most of the typical
needs for 3d data visualization. They can be added to the plot in
a similar way and they will appear on the same scene.


The sampled values of our function are available as an attibute of
`plt_surface.heights`. Thus we can write. for example:

```python
plt_surface.heights.shape
```

Since, `plt_surface` is an ipywidget, its state on a javascript side
and python are connected. We can simply assign it to other values
(numpy array) and the plot will be automatically updated:

```python
plt_surface.heights = np.log((x**2 + y**2))
```

In fact, such updates are efficient enough to allow for a high degree of
interactivity. One can produce animations:


```python
plot.camera_auto_fit = False 
for i in range(50):
    plt_surface.heights = np.sin(x**2 + y**2+1.6/10*i)
```

 
Such an approach can be desirable when one needs to combine server-side
data processing with 3d interactive visualization. For example, in K3D
we do not support unstructured volumetric meshes. There exist,
however, a very powerful library for processing such data -
VTK. An arbitrary unstructured mesh can be displayed at its surface which
consists of triangles. The latter can be easily visualized with
K3D. Therefore one can process data on server-side using VTK and send
its triangularized surface representation to the plot. Since the
surface data is in many cases much smaller than the volume, it allows
for building responsive web applications.

The effect of such data processing are following:



<iframe src="/public/images/k3d/vtk_cutter.html" height="550" width="100%">></iframe>


The web browser gives access to the graphics hardware and allows to
perform very computationally intensive visualizations. One such
technique is a volume rendering. It has been implemented in K3D
widget: 

<iframe width="900" height="500" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zCeQ_ZXy_Ps" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>



The flexibility
of network architecture allows to easily build an HPC data
visualization pipelines using jupyter notebook and webGL
frontend. One can preprocess volume of data on the server and send
small dataset to K3D widget for immediate inspection.

  - https://github.com/K3D-tools/K3D-jupyter



