---
layout: activity
title: "SageMathCloud for OpenDreamKit"
author: Viviane Pons
type: blogpost
date: 2016/08/30
---

Part of OpenDreamKit's mission is to work on [user interfaces](https://github.com/OpenDreamKit//OpenDreamKit/tree/master/WP4)
for better collaboration and also [component architectures](https://github.com/OpenDreamKit//OpenDreamKit/tree/master/WP3).
This is why the [SageMathCloud](http://cloud.sagemath.com/) platform is of special
interest for us. One of our tasks is even to [have a deeper look into its code base](https://github.com/OpenDreamKit/OpenDreamKit/issues/55).
In this post, as part of our *Review on emerging technologies*, we propose an overview
of the platform.

## What is SageMathCloud?

SageMathCloud is an online platform which allows the creation of **collaborative scientific projects**
including many scientific softwares and tools like [SageMath](http://www.sagemath.org/),
[Jupyter](http://jupyter.org/), [SciPy](https://www.scipy.org/), [Julia](http://julialang.org/),
[Latex](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/LaTeX), and more.

Its codebase is [open-source](https://github.com/sagemathinc/smc), distributed under the GNU General Public
License. The platform is run by a private company (SageMath Inc.) created by William Stein
who is also the initiator of the SageMath software. The platform offers both free
and paying premium accounts.

### Projects

The main tool of the SageMathCloud platform is the possibility to create **projects**
from which you can access the many features. A single user can create as many 
projects as needed. Each project is an **independant Linux virtual machine**. It
thus comes with a full file system and an **online terminal** that allows you to
run Linux commands. The storage of each project is limited by default but can be 
extended on premium accounts. You can access the files through the SageMathCloud 
web interface or also through ssh.

One key feature is that each project can be **shared by multiple users**. This allows
sharing access to the files and also **real time editing** though the platform. Single
files or folders can also be made **public**. A link is then provided which allows
either viewing or downloading the files (even without a SageMathCloud account) and
also an easy way to copy onto a different SageMathCloud project owned by the viewer.

### Softwares

When you create a SageMathCloud project, your Linux virtual machine comes with many
softwares and tools especially useful for mathematicians and scientists in general.
We list here the most important ones.

 * **Sage** and **Sage worksheets**. As the name indicates, the platform was primarily
 developed as a replacement for the old Sage notebook server to allow collaborative
 online work using Sage. The **SageMath** software is of course installed by default
 on the virtual machine and one can run Sage through the online terminal. The platform
 also offers its own **Sage worksheet filetype** to edit and run Sage code in a cell-type
 system (as in the Jupyter notebook or the old Sage notebook) mixed with other cell types
 like text and HTML. This is used to create interactive worksheets that can be easily
 shared and copied.

 * **Jupyter**. SageMathCloud includes a Jupyter notebook interface with many kernel
 options (Python 2, Python 3, Anaconda, Sage, R, Julia, and more). On top of the usual
 interface, the SageMathCloud Jupyter offers **real time** synchronization among 
 multi users.

 * **Latex**. The common document preparation system Latex is installed on the virtual
 machine. It also offers a multi user editor with real time synchronization and
 a dual view of both the Latex source code and pdf output.

## Sharing and teaching with SageMathCloud

### Accessibility

The great advantage of SageMathCloud is that it offers a **complete scientific environment** 
without the usual setting up hassle. It makes the different softwares very easy to access
independently of the user personal system as long as there is an access to a good Internet
connexion. As an example, a mathematician can share a demo of code (in a Jupyter
or a Sage notebook) that could be used directly by its collaborators. Of course,
the Internet access is itself a limit. For example, the system is not well suited 
for developing countries where bandwidth is sometimes limited.

### Teaching

When teaching is concerned, the sharing facilities of SageMathCloud come very useful.
Moreover, the platform offers a course managing system. The principle is as follows:
the teacher has acces to a "main project" containing the class material; every student
has its own project which is shared with the teacher. The course management system
allows for automatic actions like:

 * Create all the student projects where the teacher is automatically added as a 
 collaborator.
 * Create assignments by copying some material from the main project to the students
 projects.
 * Collecting, grading, and returning assignments by copying back and forth between
 the students projects and the main project.

An *assignment* is just a folder. It can have multiple content depending on the class.
Of course, the system is especially interesting when the assignment is given within
an **interactive worksheet** and can then be achieved by the student directly on the
interface. SageMathCloud then becomes a very good interface to initiate students 
to the many scientific softwares it offers.

## SageMathCloud and OpenDreamKit

The many features of SageMathCloud make it a very interesting project for OpenDreamKit
to look at. Indeed, it offers one of the leading technologies for scientists in terms of cloud
project management, teaching and sharing facilities. It also has some limits which
we would like to address through our project:

 * **Accessibility**. As previously mentioned, the cloud based interface can not be easily
 accessed in places where the Internet connexion is not good enough. One solution
 would be to have clear easy-to-follow instructions on how to install a SageMathCloud
 platform in a local institution.

 * **Interoperability and file formats**. At the moment, the SageMathCloud platform
 offers two file formats for interactive worksheet: the Jupyter one and a home-made
 Sage worksheet one. It is not possible to run the Sage worksheets elsewhere than 
 on the platform. Especially, there is no way to run a Sage worksheet on a local
 Sage installation. It is not yet clear what a long term unified worksheet solution 
 would be and it is part of the OpenDreamKit project to work on this question. The
 technical choices made for the Sage worksheets are interesting to investigate in this
 regard, as well as local SageMathCloud installations, file conversions and so on.


## Links

 * [Guiding principles for SageMath Inc.](http://sagemath.blogspot.fr/2015/05/guiding-principles-for-sagemath-inc.html)
 * [The origin of SageMath](http://wstein.org/talks/2016-06-sage-bp/bp.pdf) by William Stein
 * [What is SageMathCloud](http://sagemath.blogspot.fr/2014/08/what-is-sagemathcloud-lets-clear-some.html) by William Stein

